This is an interview with Dr. William D. Van
Ganten, head of the Department of Petroleum
Engineering. Today's date is October 23, 1981.
Let's begin, Dr. Van Ganten, by you telling us
something about your early years in Rockdale and
Corsicana. You were born in Rockdale in 1934.
That's correct. I was born in 1934, and I lived
there until 1937, and my family moved to
Corsicana. And I grew up in Corsicana all the way
through high school. I graduated in 52 and came to
Texas A&M at that time as an undergraduate
student. What was your father's occupation? He
was a oil field worker. Worked in the woodbine
field there in Corsicana and then later
W-O-O-D-B-I-N-E. One word? Yes. Woodbine Field
in Corsicana. And later moved to what's called the
Shallow Field in Corsicana, which was right next
to the town itself. So I grew up living in the oil
field. And so I worked, of course, in the summers.
for the oil companies there. All the way while I was
in school here at A&M, I continued to work in the
summers for the oil companies around Corsicana.
What recollections do you have of how the oil
companies were operating in the forest when you
were growing up? Well, the operations around
Corsicana were all independent oil operators,
and it was a very hard time economically as far as
the oil companies. The oil price of oil was very low
and they were pretty much shoestring type
operations and so there weren't any of the very few
of the modern technological type procedures that
we use today were employed there. Did many of the
wildcatters in that area make a lot of money out of
this? Not too many. During the 40s was not a real
boom economically and the companies were of
course, were in a bad condition before World War
II, and they really didn't get in through the 40s.
They were still in fairly bad economic condition.
What was it that brought them out of this bad
economic condition? Well, really the oil company
stayed in a fairly bad economic condition up until
about 1973 when the Arab oil embargo occurred.
When the price of... unsatisfactory financial
condition up to this time well there was an
abundance of oil and gas the there was more oil a lot
more oil available than the need was and when
you've got a surplus of anything the price is
naturally not going to increase and so during that
period of time there was due to inflation and
different factors the The cost of doing business
was increasing, but the value of the oil wasn't
increasing much, and so it put the companies in a
squeeze.
You decided then to come to A&M to major in
petroleum engineering? That's correct. Because
as a boy you were around oil field work, and that's
how you got your interest in petroleum? That's
right. And you came here in 1952? Came here to A&M in
1952. which of course was in the class of 56. I
started out majoring in petroleum and then before
I finished I decided that I also wanted to get a
degree in geology. So I got a dual degree which took
five years, a BS in petroleum and a BS in geology.
Graduated in 1957.
Why did you have an interest in geology? geology
ties in directly with petroleum engineering, and
really to be a good petroleum reservoir engineer,
you need to have a good background in geology. And
then you stayed on here and got your advanced
degrees here also? Well, of course, in 57 I left and
went to work with Magnolia Petroleum Company.
Where? In Vanderbilt, which was down close to
Victoria. But Magnolia Petroleum Company became
Mobile Oil Company with their reorganization in
1960. So between 57 and 62, during that time, I
worked for Magnolia for one year. I went into the
service, into the Air Force, spent two years in the
Air Force. came back to Magnolia, but this was in
1960. When I came back, it was now Mobile. They
changed the name in the first part of 1960. And I
worked for Mobile for two more years before I came
back to A&M to graduate school. How long were you
here for graduate school? I was here in graduate
school for four years. Came in 62 and graduated in
66 with a PhD. So I got a master's in petroleum
engineering and a doctorate in petroleum
engineering. What was the topic of your research?
Research was in some of the fundamental
properties of reservoir rock. How to, dealing
primarily with logging properties, on how to
predict fluid saturations in the reservoir rock
from well logs.
And then you became a... I became a member of the
faculty in 1966. What rank? I started out as an
assistant professor.
Well, I guess I take it back. In 1966, I became a
research professor.
assistant or associate, I forget which it was,
with the engineering experiment station. And I
kept that job for one year. And then I joined the
teaching staff in 67. And you became department
head when? 76.
What are some of the duties that you perform as your
best department head? Well, as department head,
Of course, A&M has department head rather than
department chairman, which the department head
pretty much has the sole responsibility for the
department. I have to recruit faculty for the
department to ensure that we have adequate
faculty to teach the courses. I prepare the budget
for the department. I administer the budget once
it is approved. I'm in charge of the personnel
within the department, all the secretarial
force, the bookkeeping force, reproducing
section, plus the teaching faculty themselves.
How many people are under your supervision? We've
got 24 faculty members.
seven staff members under my supervision.
You became department head after the demand for
patrol increased as a result of that embargo.
Discuss how the department changed between the
time before that and after. What an effect would
this have on the department? and look at the time
that I came to the petroleum engineering, came
back to graduate school in 62, we had very few
students in petroleum engineering at that time. I
don't actually have the records here, but it's
something like 100 students I would say total in
petroleum engineering. And from 62 up until
the time of the Arab oil embargo, there was very
little increase in the number of students
enrolled in petroleum. I think in 1973 we had 140
students that were enrolled in petroleum
engineering.
During that period of time, the
cost of oil was very low. we were producing, or we
had the capacity to produce more oil than the
country could actually utilize. The country was
importing a lot of oil at, or was importing oil at a
very cheap price. Cheaper than it could be
produced here. So there was very little incentive
to develop our own petroleum resources, any
additional petroleum resources. So we were
developing few of our own resources. The demand
was continuing to increase during that period.
Anytime that happens, you're going to get to a
situation, finally, where the demand is going to
exceed the production, exceed the supply, which
occurred back before 1973.
But finally, by 73, we were very dependent on
imports of oil to satisfy our domestic needs. So I
guess the Arabs finally wised up to what was going
on, the state of things, that they now were in the
driver's seat, not the United States, as far as oil
prices were concerned. So they started to
increase oil prices. As they did this, everyone
realized that we had not done the exploration that
we should have. We had not developed the new
reserves that we should have and now we were in a
situation where we were relying very heavily on
countries that we had no control over. So
beginning in about 73 with the embargo there was a
big push in the United States to try to increase
domestic production. Well all during the 60s
there was a big environmental push in the United
States. Everyone was very much concerned about
the environment no one really was worrying about
our energy situation because they had sort of
taken the energy situation for granted so there
were there were a lot of restrictions that were
placed on not only petroleum industry but all
industries during the 60s trying to make sure that
the environment was not damaged in any way and
really a lot of these restrictions were not very
well thought out Well, anyway, beginning in about
73 then with the Arab oil embargo, there was a big
push with the price going up that made more funds
available to do exploration. So there was a big
push in this country to increase the level of
exploration to try to find more oil ourselves.
When did it become economically feasible to
increase the oil production in the United States?
Well, I think it became feasible in about 73. when
the price went up. Up until that time, it really
wasn't economical to do new expiration. Your
expiration cost. How low the price was, or how much
would the price have to bend to make it feasible to
produce it? Oh, that's hard to say. You know, in 73,
the price was about $3 a barrel. And right now, it's
$35 a barrel. So in eight years, it has gone up more
than a factor of 10. Well,
the oil does not cost the same amount. Every barrel
of oil you produce does not cost the same amount.
Some oil is harder to find than others. So some of
it's going to cost you more money than others does.
So when the price went from $3 a barrel to $6 a
barrel, that made some fields economical to
explore and produce. Whether or not the field is
economical depends on how hard it is to get the oil.
That's right. how hard it is to get it out of the
ground and how hard it is to find. You know, how many
dry holes you're going to have to drill before you
find a producer. Well, when did the situation
start to improve after all companies started to
increase? Well, as far as with Texas A&M, as far as
the petroleum department, we had an almost
instantaneous increase in enrollment beginning
in 73. And it has been increasing every year since
then. Right now, we're averaging about 30% per
year increase in enrollment in the department.
Last year, we had 1,050
students in the department. This year, we've got
1,450 students in the department. Here at A&M,
it's about third in size, I think. Mechanical
engineering is probably the largest with about
1,800 students, and electrical engineering is
the next largest, and then petroleum. But as this
demand for oil increased, so did the salaries paid
to the petroleum engineers and where that
happened. That's right. Can you discuss that,
please? Well, the petroleum engineering
salaries have, for the past five years anyway,
have been averaging $200 to $300 a month more than
the salaries paid to other engineers. So that also
has aided in the rapid growth in petroleum
engineering here at A&M because we've had
students that were majoring in other areas of
engineering that have transferred over to
petroleum.
Well, I can say last May, in May of 81, the average
starting salary was $2,302 a month for a petroleum
engineer. And it was around $2,000 a month for the
average of the other engineers. And from what I can
see now, the average starting salary for May of 82
is going to be somewhere in the range of $2,600 a
month. It's going up about 13%, 14% a year. What was
the salary level before the embargo in comparison
to other fields of engineering?
Was it running less or the same? Petroleum
engineering was running the same as other fields
of engineering up until the time of the embargo.
How do you assess the quality of the students that
you're getting in this field? The
quality of the students that we're getting or the
students that we're putting out? Both. Well,
we have most knowledge of the students that we're
putting out. The students that we get, we really
don't teach them many courses until their junior
year. So we have students that come into petroleum
engineering, they're majoring in petroleum,
they're here for maybe here for two years and then
transfer out to some other major and we never see
them and they transfer out because they're not
doing well in math and chemistry and physics and
that sort of thing. I would, in overall, I would say
in the last five years that the quality of the
incoming student probably hasn't increased any.
Has not increased any. It's probably about
constant. Even though the I think the SAT scores of
our students have increased slightly. I think as
far as the university is concerned, they have
increased some. As far as our department is
concerned, I think they're probably about
constant. And I think the quality of the student
that we're producing is about the same as it was
eight years ago.
has been hard to maintain that quality, because as
your numbers increase, the students do not get as
much individual attention. And in a normal
situation, you would expect the quality to
deteriorate as the numbers increase. I think
right
now, our senior class has about 175 students in it,
and our junior class has about 190 students in it.
We've got a sophomore class that has about 400 and a
freshman class that has about 600. I think the
quality of our junior and senior students is very
good. I think they're going to be excellent
engineers when they graduate. I can't really say
to the quality of the freshman and sophomore
students because we haven't had that much
interaction with them. What about female
students? Have you had an increase of women
students? Well, we have about 15% female in the
department right now. And we have had that same
percentage for about the last three years, I'd
say. But of course, it wasn't too many years ago
that we didn't have any females at A&M. But we've
sort of hit a constant situation now on the
percentage of females enrolled in the
department. What do you think attracts females to
petroleum engineering? I think it's the same
thing that attracts the males into it. It's the
good salary situation and the chance to do
something meaningful in this day when we have an
energy crisis.
Where are some of the places that petroleum
engineers work? Well, of course they work where
the oil fields are and where the the major offices
of the oil companies, where they're located, and
this is primarily in Texas, both the Gulf Coast
area, East Texas, West Texas, in Louisiana,
primarily along the coast and offshore, offshore
Texas, New Mexico, the Rocky Mountain region with
the new overthrust production, California,
Alaska. Could you comment on the Alaska oil rush?
Well, I don't know whether I would call it the
Alaska oil rush or not. I mean, there was a major
field discovered in Alaska, and that field has
pretty well been developed. And I think things are
fairly stationary in Alaska now, you know, as far
as the amount of operations that are going on. It's
a very nice oil field, and Of course, I'd like to see
us discover some more fields like that up there,
but up to this point, that one field has been the
only major field that's been discovered. Has the
Texas oil fields encountered any opposition from
environmentalists, any organized opposition?
Well, I
don't really know how to answer that. We haven't
had anybody marching at the oil fields like...
They did at Diablo Canyon Nuclear Plant. We
haven't had anything like that. I think Texas is
fairly receptive to energy exploration,
production, refining, that sort of thing,
because there's a large percentage of the people
in the state make their livelihood from that. But
that doesn't mean to say that the oil companies
don't really have to toe the line as far as the
environment is concerned. The Railroad
Commission in the state of Texas federal
government have a set of regulations that the oil
companies have to follow. And it has made
operations a lot more expensive than they were
back in the days before they went into effect. Let
me ask you another question about your steel
population. What about the number of blacks? Do
you have a small number in your soap line? Well, I
guess I can answer that by saying Texas A&M has a
small number.
I don't believe that there is any prejudice
against a black student at Texas A&M or in
petroleum engineering. I think it's just a matter
of the students that can qualify, that can make the
grades, are treated just like they're all treated
the same, whatever their color is. Do you have any
efforts to recruit blacks in this department?
really aren't out recruiting any kind of students
we've got a lot of students that come to us in the
last five years we haven't had to do a whole lot of
recruiting ourselves
most
of our faculty members are 75% teaching 25%
research and with the Large increases in
enrollment that we've had, this has taken its
toll, I guess you might say, as far as research is
concerned. We are not doing as much research as we
would like to be doing, although we're probably
doing a lot more research than we were five years
ago. What are some of the research projects that
are underway now that have recently been
completed? We have three or four areas that we're
doing most of our research in. One of these is
numerical simulation. We have our own computer
here in the department. And the numerical
simulation of oil and gas reservoirs is a big area
of research. By this, we are able to predict how a
reservoir is going to perform under different
type conditions, doing it with a mathematical
model. Another area, a large area, is underground
lignite gasification. We've done laboratory
experiments and we also have had several field
tests involving the burning of lignite in the
ground and recovering the energy from the lignite
at the surface in the form of a gas. This project is
still an active project. Of course our numerical
simulation is still an active area. We have a good
bit of effort in what's called enhanced recovery
of oil and gas. And this involves injecting of some
type of fluid into the reservoir to get a higher
recovery of the oil that's contained within the
reservoir. We also have a large area of expertise
in stimulation of low permeability reservoirs,
primarily the hydraulic fracturing of tight gas
reservoirs. Those four areas are our primary
areas of research.
Most of the money for financing research comes
from external support.
We, of course, work through the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station, so we do get some state
funding through the Experiment Station. but we
have external funding coming through, some of it
through the Department of Energy, but I would say
the bulk of it is coming from oil companies and
energy companies that are investing in various
research projects in the department.
Where are some of the schools your faculty
members have come from? Oh, we have members that
have gone to Penn State, Oklahoma, Georgia Tech,
New Mexico Tech,
Texas A&M, of course, University of Texas.
I guess that's about three-fourths of them have
PhDs.
How does your petroleum engineering program at
A&M compare with those at other universities?
Well, our program here is the largest petroleum
department in the nation, as far as students are
concerned. And what the runner-ups are? Oh, as far
as number of students, University of Texas is
second, and probably
LSU or Tulsa would be third. University of Tulsa?
Mm-hmm. As far as the number of faculty, we have the
largest faculty. And here again, I would imagine
Texas probably has the second largest faculty and
probably Stanford has the third largest faculty.
Our department is rated by National Education
Standards as the number one petroleum
engineering department in the nation. And it's
rated both at the graduate level and the
undergraduate level as number one. How long has it
been rated so far? Oh, I'm aware of it for at least
the last five years that it's been ranked that way.
Let's discuss the graduate program. Are both
Master of Science and Doctor of Philosophy
degrees awarded? We have Master of Science,
Master of Engineering, Doctor of Philosophy, and
Doctor of Engineering degrees. Do you have any
idea on the numbers enrolled in these programs? We
have, I think, 27 graduate students enrolled
right now. and that's about five at the doctorate
level and the others at the master's level. Are
many of the graduate students foreign students?
Not too many. We have probably a third of the
graduate students that are foreign nationals. We
have a very small percentage of our undergraduate
students that are foreign nationals, probably
not over one or two percent. Why do you suppose that
is when some of these other engineering
departments have pretty large numbers of foreign
students? I think the number of foreign students
that we have is a function of our entrance
requirements, that we have not given any
financial support to any foreign nationals. And
the foreign nationals have to meet the same
entrance requirement as our U.S. students. And
using that criteria, we have come up with about not
too many foreign nationals in the program. Do some
of the other departments have more lenient
requirements for law enforcement?
I don't know about that. Do holders of advanced
degrees in petroleum engineering command larger
salaries than those with a bachelor's degree?
Yes, I would say that a master's degree probably
gets a student about $200 or so a month more than
what a bachelor's degree would get, beginning
salary. And we really don't have enough PhDs
coming out. They certainly command more than a
master's, but I don't have a good handle on what the
starting salary for a PhD is. Is it difficult to
convince students to obtain graduate degrees for
high salaries they're offered with bachelor
degrees? Yes, it's very difficult to do that. And
we're making a fairly large push right now to try to
increase the number of students that we have in the
graduate program. The industry needs more people
with graduate degrees, and the universities need
more teachers. There's a very serious problem in
the nation today trying to get engineering
teachers, engineering faculty. And one thing
we've got to do is increase the number of graduate
students. Let's discuss the Department of
Energy. Do you think it's been successful in
improving the nation's energy situation? Well, I
don't know what you mean by successful. Are you
talking about economically successful? Well,
yeah. The Department of Energy is a very large
federal agency, and any time you get a very large
agency of any type, it's probably not very
efficient. And I would say that the Department of
Energy has not been very efficient in increasing
the supply of oil and gas in the country. They
certainly haven't been efficient in increasing
the supply of oil and gas as far as increasing the
energy supply. I think they've been spending a lot
of money on sources of energy that may pay off 20
years or 50 years from now. They haven't spent a
whole lot of money on oil and gas research, which is
needed in the short run. There hadn't been as much
money spent on oil and gas research. I imagine they
assumed that the oil companies would do the
research.
Do you have any figures on how much oil production
has increased, say, since 1973 in the United
States? I don't have any thing here. I can look. I
can look those numbers up if you want me to give you
some numbers. You know, what we've been trying to
do is to, as far as if you look at the reserves of oil
and gas in the country, the reserves have been
declining for a number of years. And what we're
trying to do is to get the reserves on the upswing
again. And the only way you get reserves on the
upswing is by drilling more wells. Back in the
mid-50s, we were drilling about 55,000 wells per
year. During the late 60s, we were down to, in early
70s, we were down to about 25,000 wells per year,
not even half as many as we were drilling in the 50s.
Well, now we're back up to the range of 60 or so
thousand wells per year. So I would expect to see
the oil reserves to, to follow this same trend and
for us to see an increase in the amount of oil
reserves that we have. If you had control over
public policy, what would you do to guarantee a
large increase in oil production? What could be
done to do this? Well, I think we need to have more
tax incentives to increase, to increase
exploration and increase enhanced secondary
type recovery. You know, we currently have the
windfalls profits tax, which really is not a
profits tax. It is a direct tax off the top. It
doesn't make any difference whether you're
making a profit or making a loss. That tax still
comes right off the top. If it was actually a
profits tax, well, then that would be a real
incentive for the companies to take that money and
try to invest it to develop other resources rather
than just paying it in as taxes, whereas now they
don't have that option. They're taking really the
heart of the income from the oil, and they're
paying it to the government. Well, then that's the
reason a lot of taxes have opposed that one fall.
That's right. The name is a misnomer. It is not a
profits tax. It is just a tax right off the top. So it
is a deterrent to us becoming energy
self-sufficient. It was passed by Congress as a
way of countering public attention to so-called
huge increases in oil company profits. I think
that's right.
This tax is billed as a detriment. Why is it that
there hasn't been reports of oil companies, for
instance, making the greatest profits ever here
at this occasion? Well, what you hear is percent
increase over last year. Well, that's not a very
good way of looking at it. We may have lost $1
million last year, and so we only lose $500,000
this year. And that's a big increase. So you can't
go by percent increase in profits. The oil
companies were in a very bad financial situation
before the air oil embargo. Since that time,
they've been increasing. But you don't hear any of
the reports
profits on investment if we aren't saying that
you're making 5% on your investment. In fact, if
you look at the actual amount of money that the oil
companies are making on their investment, if they
took that same investment down to the savings
alone and invested it at 15% or whatever your
federal money is these days, they would probably
make more money off of that than they're making off
of their investment in the oil industry. But it's
not reported that way. It's reported as percent
increase over last year. Well, you think the
windfall promise tax was passed for political
reasons? Sure it was passed for political
reasons. It was a way for the federal government to
support the programs.
I doubt
it.
I think
the government is in a tight situation right now.
as far as trying to balance the budget. To repeal
the windfall profits tax would take away a large
source of revenue to the federal government. I
don't really expect them to do that. I think it
should be done, but I don't really expect them to do
it. What about alternate sources of energy? You
mentioned earlier that the Department of Energy
has invested a lot of money in other searches in
this field. Do you have any personal... Any ideas
personally on what other sources of fuel might be
usable in the future? Well, I think it's the
standard things that are being mentioned now. I
think nuclear is an excellent source, and we need
to get on with nuclear development and quit all the
harassment and so forth of the companies that are
trying to develop nuclear energy. It isn't a
matter of whether we want to or don't want to. It's a
matter that we've got to. So the longer we put it
off, the more protests and the more legal
confusion there is, well, the longer it's going to
be before we actually solve our problem. What
about
would alcohol as a source propel cars? Well, I
think it has a very low potential. If you look at how
much energy is required to produce the alcohol
versus how much energy you get from the alcohol. It
takes almost exactly the same amount of energy to
make it as you get from it. So you're winding up
where you began. In order to make the alcohol,
you've got to run it through a distillation. Well,
the energy that's required to distill the alcohol
It's the same amount that you get from the alcohol.
That's what keeps the price so high. That's what
keeps the price so high. If you're going to distill
it using natural gas, you're going to burn up more
natural gas to make the alcohol than the BTU
content that you get from the alcohol. So why just
not make the alcohol to begin with and use the
natural gas for whatever you needed the energy
for? How much more efficient from that standpoint
is it to produce gasoline as far as energy? Oh... It
is tremendously more efficient. I don't have
those numbers, but I would estimate that
you're only using maybe 25% of the energy to
generate the gasoline that you actually get from
the gasoline. Whereas with alcohol, methanol, it
takes 100%. Now, if you can use some type of fuel
like corn stalks or wood chips or something like
that that you can't burn in a car to produce a liquid
fuel that you can burn in a car, well, then you've
accomplished something. You've traded one type
of energy for a more useful type of energy. But as
far as the energy balance itself is concerned, you
wind up right where you began. So that is not going
to solve our energy problem. What about producing
energy from what's it called, shale? Shale oil.
Shale oil. That is a potential source of oil, of
energy. Here again, you're talking about a very
expensive process. And the cost of energy that we
have today, like $35 a barrel for oil, shale oil is
doubtful as to whether it's economical at that
cost. What about the current glut on the oil market
nationwide? Do you have any response to that or
reason for that being? Well, I think the primary
reason is the
conservation that has been practiced in this
country and other countries. primarily with the
automobile going from the large cars to the small
cars, has decreased the requirements for
gasoline. The producing countries have pretty
much continued to produce at their same rate, and
our consumption has been lower. Consequently, we
get an excess of oil.
What effect do you think the deregulation of oil
has had on the current prices? I don't think it's
had any effect on it. Do you think it will have any
effect in the long run? I think it will have effect
of better balancing supply and demand. Do you
expect gasoline prices to stay the same or change
over the next several years? I expect them to stay
pretty much the same as long as we have a glut in the
oil market. Here again, you're looking at the
forces of the market, the supply and demand
situation. If you've got more of a supply than you
have a demand, well, you don't expect the prices to
go up.
What impact do you think that the OPEC policies
will have on our oil supply? OPEC has a very large
effect on our oil supply. I really feel like that
OPEC, that we haven't looked at it that way, but I
feel that OPEC probably did us a big favor when they
raised the price of oil, not only for the United
States but for the whole world. As long as you could
get all the oil you wanted at $3 a barrel, you're not
going to invest anything in developing new
sources of energy. Well, oil is not going to last
forever. And you don't want to run down to the
situation where when you use up the last barrel of
oil in the world and you have nothing else to take
its place, you decide that maybe I better start
working on a different source of energy. So the
price of oil needs to be in line with the, what it's
actually worth, I guess is what I'm trying to say.
Why were the Arabians selling this oil at less than
they could have gotten for all these years? They,
I'm not sure they were selling it for less than what
they could have gotten all these years because as I
was saying a while ago, the United States had more
oil capacity than they could actually produce
back during those years when The Arabians were
selling it for $3 a barrel. But it finally got to the
situation where U.S. oil capacity started to
decline, where we were dependent on them, where
they did have control of the market. Before that,
they didn't have control of the market. We had
control of the market.
Do you think this controversy over the selling of
the AWACS planes to Saudi Arabia is tied in with oil
industry, or do you think it's strictly a foreign
policy issue? Well, I think it's a foreign policy
issue.
Of course, I support very strongly the U.S.
selling AWACS to Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia is a
very good friend of this country.
And I think if we don't sell it to the Saudis, it will
be interpreted by them as an unfriendly act on our
part, which certainly will not be in our national
interest.
Do you have any idea how much oil we're
getting from Saudi Arabia? Oh, I think we're
getting roughly half of our imports come from
Saudi Arabia. A very large, substantial portion
of our imports. Do you think the sale is rejected by
the Congress? It appears it will be, and this one
could affect our oil imports. I don't think
there's any question about it. It's just one
factor. I'm not saying it's the only factor, but
Saudi Arabia has looked to the United States for
protection. They have looked to the United States
for leadership over the years. Saudi Arabia is
very much Americanized, so to speak. I've been to
Saudi Arabia for the last two years on trips, and
they're our friends, I guess is the way I'd put it.
And like I said a while ago, if we don't sell them
these AWAC planes, we are not being their friends.
We are not treating them as we should treat our
friends. And I think we're going to have to pay the
consequences. Do you think the main opposition to
the sale of these planes is politically as a way to
embarrass Reagan, or do you think it's because of
the power of the Jewish lobby? Oh, I think it's
because of the power of the Jewish lobby.
Do you have any ideas on the long-range energy
picture facing the United States in the 1980s?
I don't think it's going to get a whole lot better.
You see the current situation standing itself for
a while. For a long while. Do you think the gasoline
prices are going to remain about where they are for
how much longer? It's hard to say. I think they'll
remain this way for another couple of years
anyway, unless we have something You know, if we
have a war that breaks out in the Middle East and
that supply is cut off where there isn't an oil
glut, well, the prices can change next month. But
if the world situation in the Middle East stays as
it is right now, I would expect oil prices to stay
constant for the next couple of years. You know,
we've gone almost a year now with prices constant.
Anything else you can say? I'm just about to run out
of questions. Anything that we need to touch on? I
think that the petroleum engineering curriculum
is a very good curriculum for a young person in that
he is trained how to drill wells, how to produce
fluids from wells, how to separate those fluids,
process them at the surface, ship them down
pipelines to the consumer. He learns about fluid
flow through porous media. He learns about
geology and economics. With that background, he
can be a petroleum engineer and produce oil and
gas. He could produce groundwater just as well. He
could produce geothermal energy just as well. He
could do mineral leaching, mineral processing
just as well. He could work in institute lignite
gasification or coal gasification just as well.
So it isn't a degree that is...